sort of Pacific-wide, caused by things which
occurred out in the Pacific when tape number two
ran out suddenly.
We were talking about a drought wide in the West
caused possibly by occurrences out in the Pacific
when tape ran out on site number two. And then I'll
save that second side of the tape. I'll come back up
here Monday afternoon. Okay, you will come back
Monday afternoon? Yes, I sure will. I'm going to
make sure that's right. Yes, it sure is right. Now,
we were really talking about drought conditions.
Oh, yeah. Are you on yet or not? I'm on. All right.
What I was going to say was that this is a fairly rare
event apparently, in essentially a
climatological sense. It's either something
that's occurred about once in the past century or
maybe twice in the past century. So it's worth
documenting. And I made some tentative sort of
gestures to try and get some special observations
made to essentially find out what was happening in
the ocean under these unusual conditions. And I
couldn't find anybody. who has had the ability or
capability to do it, because everybody's
committed to other programs. And this, I think, is
very tragic in a way, that here's a good sort of
scientific problem, and it has its practical
aspects too, and yet you couldn't do anything
about it. You know, as a matter of fact, people now
are talking about more and more trying to tie
together the work of the atmosphere and the work of
the ocean. But it seems almost as if the
departments are dividing whether they're coming
closer together on these kinds of problems. Well,
I don't see too many indications of them getting
closer together. There is some interest. at the
moment of some closer cooperation between what is
called the Department of Atmospheric Sciences
and Oceanography, but I think it just means that
each will continue to do what it believes is its
mission and they may get together now and again,
not really a joint activity. And this is, I think
it's most unfortunate because I
don't think it's entirely a prejudiced point of
view, but I think many of the meteorological
events are, in effect, if not initiated,
dominated by ocean conditions rather than the
other way around. If we want to look at long-term,
large-scale forecasting and so on, there's got to
be more attention played to the characteristics
of the ocean and there
are some programs in other countries where there
has been a much closer integration of the
atmospheric and marine things and that's
particularly true in Japan where one of the major
oceanographic activities in Japan has been the
meteorological service. But in this country it's
traditionally been very, very difficult to get
any sort of participation by the meteorologist as
such in kind of oceanographic things. Now there
are some exceptions, but the exceptions are are,
in a sense, so few that they're kind of
conspicuous. I
ran across his name today. Nehmias is one person
who has attempted to do this. Dr. Bjorkness at
UCLA. But they're dealing more on a kind of a,
almost a kind of climatic study type thing. Now, I
have a series of questions, really, about, again,
about government participation in the early
organization of oceanography. Are there any
congressmen or senators or administrations you
would like to cite who forwarded oceanography as
an academic discipline in the 40s and the 50s?
Well, I think the...
outstanding example is Senator Magnuson, who has
for a number of years been very much involved with
these things and is still very much involved, not
just as a representative of our state, but as he's
concerned about this national program.
He is the only one, and I've had only very little
limited set of contacts with him, but I've over the
years gone by have had a fair amount of contact with
his some of his staff, but not with in my case with
any any others at all. We've never had a
congressman from the state of Washington I don't
think that has been interested and senator
Jackson's interests have always been in other in
other fields so professor the senator Magnuson is
is the to my mind the number one here now if you talk
to people from other parts of the country I'm sure
you get other no he's always cited The only other
exception is that frequently Vice President
Humphrey is cited in Washington for offering
special aid at one time or another. Well, he did,
and particularly during this phase of the
Stratton Commission, that's not his technical
name, and so on, and he was very much involved in
this, and of course we have on the campus here
Professor Edward Wank, who's was one of the key
people, not in the Stratton Commission, but in the
Marine Council, which functioned at the same time
as him. Is Ed Wink on the campus now? Do you want this
on the tape? Yes. I'm not sure whether he's
physically on the campus as of today or so, because
he's been on a sabbatical leave this past year, but
he has an appointment in engineering on the campus
here, yeah.
So he was supposed to be back this month, but I'm not
sure whether he's back or not. We can certainly
check up next week.
I followed him from D.C. and halfway across the
country trying to get in to see him. He's a hard man
to get to see.
Now, there's also been suggested that really the
sudden boom in oceanography that occurs in the 50s
comes as a result of the IGY activities. Would you
agree with that? Well, I think IGY marked a change
here in that this was, I think it's fair to say,
about the first time that there had ever been funds
available to a number of institutions for
essentially a planned program of events. And
I think part of the reason for some of the boom that
followed that and the Indian Ocean Expedition was
a case in point here, was the fact that there was a
recognition on the part of the
government that maybe science was a useful kind of
diplomatic tool here, because this opened up
communications with Russia, at least in some
areas, and it turned out that oceanography was one
of the better in the sense of exchange of
information and sort of cooperation. Now under
IGY there was supposed to be an effect of complete
exchange, but it did not work at all because this
represented the beginning of the space program
and that sort of close, but it did keep the
communications open in oceanography. And I am
told that this is part of the reason why the
decision was made to go with this Indian Ocean
expedition, was to keep this kind of
international contacts open. And the Indian
Ocean was picked as essentially being neutral
territory. And I think it has. And ever since that
time, I think in oceanography, there has been a
reasonable set of contacts between the Russian
and American oceanographers. Now, it's not
always what you'd like it to be, but at least the
channels are open, if not very large. So I think it
was a kind of political as much. The political
implications may have essentially had an
important place here. That's what I'm trying to
say. It was not just the arguments of the
scientists or anything that did this. There was
more to it than that. There was a feeling. I don't
know how widely it was felt. I sort of felt this way
for a while. we might be, it might be possible and so
on for the, as part of a kind of a national policy to
divert some of the effort that went into the space
program as it was being sort of phased down into the
put me into the sea, but that never happened. As a
matter of fact, I anticipate my next question is
that an assumption, at least on part of the
oceanographers, was exactly what you pointed
out, that as space developed, then so would the
ocean, too. Now, it didn't occur, obviously, as
you pointed out. Now oceanographers are saying
the 70s may be the decades of the ocean because of
mariculture, aquaculture, mining for magnesium
nodules and these sorts of things. Manganese.
Manganese, I'm sorry. Manganese nodules. What
are your feelings on that? Well, there's some
curious things here which I think to a scientist
are hard to rationalize, or maybe to anybody to
rationalize, that there's obviously these
things carry with them more than a kind of a
rational approach. There's a question of people
just getting interested in doing things,
becoming aware of them. And also, it may be that
certain things will be done not for economic
justification, is a question of national
prestige or turn it around because we want to help
other countries or something. In other words,
there's a variety of sort of elements involved
here. I am not inspired by the aquaculture,
mariculture thing, because I really don't see any
great merit in it. But I will not say that there may
not be major developments in this area. But it
doesn't seem to me as a particularly
major sort of enterprise. The reason is that it is,
in effect, to cost labor and materials expensive.
At the present time, the only possibilities in
this area are for essentially very high-priced
products. Now, this may be perfectly valid in a
way, It doesn't really answer the question of
feeding large numbers of people. My feeling is
I'll let other people worry about these things.
The manganese nodule thing is, again, I think very
interesting in the way in that almost all of the
uses of marine resources have developed out of a
kind of traditional pattern over a fairly lengthy
period of time, fishing as a case in point. But even
in the petroleum business, the progress of the
extension of this drilling and wells and recovery
of petroleum and natural gas from beneath the
seashore moved gradually from on land into very
shallow water and then into deeper and deeper
water so they could, in a sense, feel their way.
This manganese nodules problem is to me
interesting because of the fact that there was no
technology in existence that could be modified or
extended. It was a completely new kind of
enterprise and it involved very major investment
of capital with no assurance that it would work.
And if they did work, whether it was economically
feasible. And we don't know the answers to that.
And I don't think we're going to know for some years
yet. I think it's a good sort of thing to do, but
it's
But it is a sort of an interesting example of
something that's more or less unique, I think. And
it may not pay off for a long, long time. So you don't
see these ideas attracting a vast amount of money,
let's say, for the oceanography? No, no. This is
what I tried to hedge on when I first started my
comments here, that just interest may promote
some of these things because people think it's
interesting or think it's fun to do these sort of
things. And, you know, who made the decision on the
part of these companies that have invested large
amounts of money in this manganese thing and, you
know, what really tipped the scales they decided
to go ahead with it. I don't think you can say it's
really on the basis of rational analysis. It's
just somebody got curious and interested. Now,
you had pointed out, again another question I
wanted to ask, that the IGY had spurred
international cooperation. Some people are
arguing now in terms of political geography that
the sort of division up of the ocean with 200-mile
limits, underdeveloped countries arguing that
they're being exploited by oceanographers or
oceanographic research at least, and
international conferences of the sea will push
American oceanography and other oceanographic
research back into shore, away from the outer
ocean, and complicate it for people in your
profession. Would you agree with those sort of
series of assumptions? Well, I think yes and no,
but in that there are again sort of strange
differences between the way in which people
regard various parts of planet Earth here that
have become so much a part of our kind of culture,
they don't stop and realize that that there have
been restraints in effect on what you can do on land
for a long, long time here because of the whole
concept of property rights. The atmosphere has
another set of things that go with it. But even
today, a country or even an individual has certain
rights to the air column immediately over a piece
of real estate. No airplanes are allowed to fly
over a foreign area without permission from that
particular country. And yet with the sea, because
of different attitudes and traditions, we have
this quite different picture that we used to call
freedom of the seas and so on, that anybody could go
anywhere, anytime, and do anything. Also, what
was a very sort of arbitrary thing, although I
think it had its basis in a very realistic sort of an
approach of the territorial sea and the three mile
limit as it's usually identified, although it was
not always three miles. But this whole business of
how do you deal with the ocean and a sense of kind of
ownership and so on, certainly unresolved, and
what's happening, as you indicated a moment ago,
is that each coastal country is extending its
interests seaward, and then the view of the
underdeveloped countries and the landlocked
countries and so on, that a large part of the ocean
should never come under any individual country's
control, but somehow or other ought to be for the
benefit of all. And this
is, as you are well aware, a subject of very hot
debate here. There are fairly strong arguments in
favor of some kind of dividing up of the ocean. Now,
it could be divided up so that, say, the United
Nations owns most of it. But if you remember your
historical precedents, all sorts of interesting
things happened at in England in particular, in
what they call the enclosure acts, that when they
went away from the concept of the common to
essentially individual property rights, that
the productivity of agriculture increased just
tremendously under this change. It's often Cited
as an example of horrible social injustice, but
apparently this is altogether true. Apparently
the poor people, in many cases, profited greatly
from the enclosures. And I'm just out of reasoning
by analogy here, but I think this fishery
business, if there is some sense of ownership,
then it's to your advantage to try and protect
that. Whereas if it doesn't belong to anybody,
they're just out there for whoever wants to take
them and so on. The whales are probably the most
newsworthy example of this at the moment.
They feel, at the moment, that this 200-mile
Fishery Conservation and Management Act will, in
effect, have a very beneficial effect on, not just
in the economic sense of how it may affect the
fishermen of the United States and so on, but
actually in the long-term kind of management of
this resource for the benefit of everybody. I just
don't know. I'm not too involved
emotionally in this business about freedom of
scientific research, although some of my peers
are concerned in that I think there are many
examples of where this is actually being abused in
one way or another. We have a right to get slapped a
little bit on it. This again gets you back into the
subject that's come up several times of what is
research and what isn't here, and that what is a
research vessel and what isn't. And this is being
debated because of the The vessels operated by the
oil companies and some of these geophysical
exploration companies want to call themselves
research vessels. So from an outsider's point of
view, what's the difference between a vessel
operated by the University of Washington and one
operated by us all? It's the same way our vessel, as
far as a foreign country is concerned, is still
looked on as a US Naval vessel. So here's the Navy
coming in. And we keep saying, oh, we're doing
basic research. And they say, yeah, but that's a
Navy ship, as it legally is. So there are all kinds
of, I think, examples here where it need to be sort
of clarified. And my own feeling is, sure, it'd be
fun to do research on other people's coastline and
so on, not only from the kind of scientific
interest of trying to help out these people. Then
they have the argument, as well as nobody in their
country that can sort of interpret the data, which
is certainly true. So I think there's still plenty
of ocean to look at, so I'm not too concerned at the
moment. What about the environmentalist impact?
I'm sorry, what do you mean? Well, what obligation
do oceanographers have to to the
environmentalist arguments which are
developing very quickly and are involving
oceanography as a discipline. Well, what— Sea
pollution, for example. Yeah, let me back up here
for a moment. I used to think I was an
oceanographer, and as I've indicated to you, I had
a very broad set of interests in terms of subject
matter and so on. But in recent years, I don't even
call myself an oceanographer. I call myself a
marine environmental scientist because I've
tried to sort of broaden out my interest. And I
think we have sort of major responsibilities in a
way to
try and understand what the environment is and
sort of identify some of the threats. But this gets
me off into another long sort of story here in that,
as I see it, most of the conflicts that are around us
today here
the battle between good and evil, in a sense. And
it's a conflict between those who want to, in
effect, exploit the ocean. And that means not only
in terms of resources and so on, but even for waste
disposal and so on, which becomes pollution here.
this on one side, and on the other, the
environmental concern, which in its broadest
sense is a very recent sort of thing. I think it only
goes back about 10 years or so.
How this conflict is going to be resolved is
exceedingly difficult for me to see. But many of
them fall in this area. And I think there are,
again, some very real problems as to how those who
would consider themselves as environmentally
concerned private citizens and so on, as to how
they can get information and so on and i've had a
number of sort of sad experiences of you know being
asked can they get certain types of information
and so on and i'd say oh yes and they then they say
well who paid for this and i have to say well the navy
or the atomic energy commission or the seattle
power and light and they say oh well that's not what
we want you know and yet they don't have the money to
support their own kind of programs. And I've also
been told that many of them have a great deal of
difficulty of getting the kind of information
that they think exists from state and federal
agencies.
I'm sure they get fighted on the sort of Freedom of
Information Act, but in many cases, they probably
don't even know what it is they were to ask for. So I
think there is a very real sort of problem here of
lack of support for the kind of environmentalist
point of view. And it's not always entirely
rational, because if the scientific work is done
adequately, it should stand up scrutiny. I've had
people, you know, just turn off completely
because I have to say, well, yes, that was
supported by some federal agency or something or
other. I mean, oh, that's tainted.